PAGE 1
Classifying mosquito wingbeat sound using TinyML
Moez Altayeb
University of Khartoum, Sudan
ICTP, Trieste, Italy
mohedahmed@hotmail.com
Marcelo Rovai
Universidade Federal de Itajubá
Itajubá, Brazil
rovai@unifei.edu.br
Marco Zennaro
ICTP
Trieste, Italy
mzennaro@ictp.it
ABSTRACT
Every year more than one billion people are infected and more
than one million people die from vector-borne diseases including
malaria, dengue, zika and chikungunya. Mosquitoes are the best
known disease vector and are geographically spread worldwide.
It is important to raise awareness of mosquito proliferation by
monitoring their incidence, especially in poor regions. Acoustic de-
tection of mosquitoes has been studied for long and ML can be used
to automatically identify mosquito species by their wingbeat. We
present a prototype solution based on an openly available dataset,
on the Edge Impulse platform and on three commercially-available
TinyML devices. The proposed solution is low-power, low-cost and
can run without human intervention in resource-constrained areas.
This insect monitoring system can reach a global scale.
KEYWORDS
ML, neural networks, TinyML, mosquito
ACM Reference Format:
Moez Altayeb, Marcelo Rovai, and Marco Zennaro. 2022. Classifying mosquito
wingbeat sound using TinyML. In Proceedings of tinyML Research Sympo-
sium (tinyML Research Symposium’22). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
In 300 B.C., Aristotle referred to mosquitoes as empis in his Historia
Animalium where he documented their life cycle and metamorphic
abilities. Since then, mosquitoes have killed billions of people. Ac-
cording to some studies [2], nearly half of the 108 billion people
that lived on Earth have been killed by mosquitoes. The mosquito
is a nearly universal animal and we have 110 trillion of them across
all the planet.
Environmental changes are causing an increase in the number
and geographical spread of vectors. Mosquitoes in particular trans-
mits far more diseases than other insects. According to the World
Health Organization (WHO) [7], mosquito bites result in the deaths
of more than one million people every year with the majority of
these deaths due to malaria. The WHO estimates that between
300 and 500 million cases of malaria occur each year and a child
dies from malaria every 30 seconds. Around the world, malaria
transmission occurs in 97 countries.
Today the majority of malaria deaths occur in Africa, South of the
Sahara, where the malaria parasite is very common. The poorest
segments of society and least-developed countries are the most
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
affected. People from poor communities with little access to health
care and clean water sources are also at risk. Although anti-malarial
drugs exist, there’s currently no malaria vaccine.
Vector-borne diseases also exacerbate poverty. Illness prevent
people from working and supporting themselves and their families,
impeding economic development. Countries with intensive malaria
have much lower income levels than those that don’t have malaria.
Countries affected by malaria turn to control rather than eradica-
tion. Vector control means decreasing contact between humans and
disease carriers on an area-by-area basis. It is therefore crucial to
be able to detect the presence of mosquitoes in a specific area. This
paper presents an approach based on TinyML and on low power
embedded devices.
2
CLASSIFICATION WITH ACOUSTIC
SENSORS
Researchers have followed two main approaches to detect the pres-
ence of mosquitoes using ML: the use of acoustic sensors or the
use of optical sensors. The use of optical sensors does not go in the
direction of a low-cost and low-power solution so we will focus on
acoustic sensors in this paper.
Acoustic surveillance has been proposed long ago as mosquitoes
can be identified using the species-specific frequencies in their
wingbeat sounds. Mosquito sounds have low complexity with a
fundamental frequency and some overtones and can be analyzed
using a Fourier Transform. Male mosquitoes produce a higher fre-
quency sound than female ones and given the slow flying speed
the Doppler shift of frequency can be neglected.
As the wingbeat frequency is between 200 and 700 Hz, micro-
phones normally used to record voice (300 to 3000 Hz) can be used
with mosquito sounds.
Researchers in [6] have proposed the use of mobile phones as
acoustic sensors for high-throughput mosquito surveillance. The
widespread adoption of smartphones make this solution interesting
and scalable. Citizens have been involved in the recordings in the
framework of a citizen science project. The collection of metadata
(time of the day, GPS position, etc) is a plus that can be used to
further improve the accuracy of classification. A limitation of this
solution is given by the power requirement of a smartphone and
by the fact that such an expensive device cannot be left unattanded
in the field, especially in poor areas. While the proposed solution
is great to gather data, it cannot be used for a regular, automatic
surveillence system. A dataset with acoustic recording from 20
different species of mosquitoes has been made openly available.
In [8] the authors explored the possibility of using ML to de-
tect Aedes aegypti, a mosquito responsible for transmitting several
diseases in poor communities. Their approach is based on the anal-
ysis of audio data captured from mosquitoes wingbeats and three

PAGE 2
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
Altayeb, Rovai and Zennaro.
distinct formulations for the model using Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNN): a single binary classifier (i.e., Aedes aegypti vs
non-Aedes aegypti), a 23-class multiclass classifier, and an ensemble
classifier that combines the output from 22 base binary classifiers.
In their conclusion they say "One challenge is running a simplified
but effective version of the model that could operate offline in a
smartphone, without posing much overhead in terms of required
processing power and battery usage." and this has been a driver for
us to design a TinyML solution.
Authors of [9] used Edge Impulse and an Arduino Nano 33 to
classify three species of mosquitoes (Anopheles, Aedes and Culex).
They use an OLED display to visualize the detected insect. They
have not engineered the solution to make it field-ready in terms of
power consumption and flexibility, and no communication option
is presented. Showing the result on the display is useful for local
populations but does not allow for long-term research on mosquito
presence.
3
PROPOSED SOLUTION
Our contribution is in the development of a TinyML solution that
allows the classification of two species of mosquitoes (Aedes aegypti
and Aedes albopictus) with the following features:
• Low cost: the proposed solution is cheaper than the existing
systems based on acoustic sensors.
• Low power: the solution we developed can live with an ex-
ternal battery for several days, enabling field measurements
that are not possible with smartphone-enabled solutions. A
small solar panel could extend the system’s lifetime.
• Unattended operation: the device can classify mosquitoes
without any data transfer to the internet or to a lab PC. There
are no humans in the loop.
• Networking: the system can send data via a LoRaWAN net-
work, allowing scientists to analyze the results and to add
more sensors (such as temperature and humidity) if needed.
LoRaWAN is a low-power data transfer protocol that can
reach very long distances, enabling data gathering in isolated
regions [3].
4
MATERIALS AND METHODS
To develop our solution we followed the workflow shown in Figure
1. This is the typical workflow of ML projects with the addition of
the deployment in the embedded device as a final step. The model
has to be optimized in terms of memory usage or of latency, as it
will run on a device with limited resources.
4.1
Data Acquisition
The starting point of our project is the public dataset created in
[6]. The dataset includes a collection of 20 different mosquito wing-
beat sounds, collected by different people, in different locations,
using different mobile phones and having different sample frequen-
cies. From the 20 species, we selected two of the most dangerous
mosquitoes, according to WHO, the Aedes aegypti (class: aegypti)
and the Aedes albopictus (class: albopictus). Two more classes
were included a) mixed samples from the remaining 18 species
included on the dataset (class: other) and b) background noise with
no mosquito(class: noise). This last class was generated mixing
background noise, laboratory background noise collected by the
authors, and several one second-long 16 kHz WAV files of various
kinds of background noise as near running water or machinery,
part of [10].
In summary, we used the following data:
• class: aegypti – 3 files with a total of 11.5 minutes of 44.1KHz/16bits
data
• class: albopictus - 2 files with a total of 11.1 minutes of
44.1KHz/16bits data
• class: other – 16 files with a total of 27 minutes of 44.1KHz/16bits
data
• class: noise
Pete Warden’s - 243 files with a total of 4.0 minutes of
16KHz/16bits data
Mukundarajan’s – 9 files with a total of 3.1 minutes of
44.1KHz /16bits data
Autors – 1 file with a total of 4.1 minutes of 16KHz/16bits
data
4.2
Data Preprocessing
The Data Preprocessing is divided into 2 phases: a) data preparation,
where we resampled and splitted all data to end with a uniform
selection of .WAV sound files (’Time Series Data’) and b) feature
generation, where using a sliding window over each one of the
raw data samples, we created ’images’ of the sound based on their
frequency spectrogram. Those ’images’ were the input tensor for
the model training in the next phase.
4.3
Data preparation (resample and split)
Using Librosa1 and Soundfile2 both open-source Python packages
for audio analysis, we converted all necessary files from the dataset
to 16KHz sample rate and cropped them to 1-minute files, to fur-
ther simplify data split in the training and testing phases. The
dataset ended with 297, 1 minute/16Khz/16bits files, split into the 4
classes. The code used for data preprocessing is openly available
on GitHub3.
Analyzing the data of the two mosquitos (Aedes aegypti and
Aedes albopictus) confirmed that their main wingbeat frequency is
inside a range of 500 and 700Hz as stated in [5] and shown in Figure
2. This also confirmed that we could use a microphone normally
used for voice measurements.
The final dataset was uploaded as .WAV files to Edge Impulse
Studio, being split as below:
• Training Data (86%):
class: aegypti – 10m 15s
class: albopictus – 8m 53s
class: other – 10m 27s
class: noise - 9m 54s
• Test Data (14%):
class: aegypti – 2m 35s
class: albopictus – 2m 13s
class: other – 1m 0s
class: noise - 0m 27s
1https://librosa.org
2https://github.com/bastibe/python-soundfile
3https://github.com/Mjrovai/wingbeat-mosquito-tinyml

PAGE 3
Classifying mosquito wingbeat sound using TinyML
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
Figure 1: Workflow diagram of a TinyML project, including the deployment to an embedded device
Figure 2: Frequency components of the Aedes Aegypti
4.4
Feature Generation
Starting with the 1-minute raw data samples, windows of 1, 2, and
4 seconds were tested. We concluded that cropping data with 1
second length ended with better accuracy. We also applied data
augmentation, going over the data with a sliding window of 250ms
(we also tested with 500ms and 1s, but 250ms ended with higher
accuracy).
With the raw features, we proceeded with the Spectrogram ex-
traction. The chosen parameters were:
• Frame length: 25 ms
• Frame Stride: 12.5 ms
• Number of Frequency bands: 128
• Noise Floor Filtering: -52db
Data used in the training ended with around 8,400 instances (or
samples).
We also explored extracting the spectrogram from the audio
signal using MFE (Mel-Filterbank Energy features), but a simple
spectrogram showed better results and lower latency, which is
critical for further deployment on embedded devices. Figure 3 shows
an example of spectrogram of a Aedes Aegypti sound measurement
of one minute.
4.5
Model Design
Each one of the 8,400 instances is a 1D image, obtained through
the spectrogram creation of a 1-second window of raw data. Each
instance or 1D Image has 5,135 features (model input tensor), given
by its length (65 columns) times its height (79 lines), as shown in
Figure 4.
The model is trained with all 8,403 instances resulting in an
output tensor that includes 4 values, each one being the probability
Figure 3: Spectrogram of a Aedes Aegypti sound measure-
ment
Figure 4: 1D image, obtained through the spectrogram cre-
ation of a 1-second window of raw data
of that specific class. The vector index is related with one of the
classified classes:
𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑠_𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒𝑠= [”𝑎𝑒𝑔𝑦𝑝𝑡𝑖”, ”𝑎𝑙𝑏𝑜𝑝𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑠”, ”𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒”, ”𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟”]
As we are working with images a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) is usually the right choice for model design. A 2D-CNN can
be used for complex image classifications, while for audio a 1D
convolution brings a smaller and acceptable solution [1].
The correct architecture including the number of 1-D layers, the
pooling layers configuration, the drop-out rate for overfitting pre-
vention, among other hyperparameter definition was obtained on

PAGE 4
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
Altayeb, Rovai and Zennaro.
a trail-test basis and also using the EON-Tuner4, an Edge Impulse
Auto-ML tool that helps to find and select the best hyperparame-
ters to be applied to model training. Good results with embedded
machine learning models should be understood not only in terms
of model accuracy, but also for low latency and limited memory
consumption.
The simplest but yet very effective model design, was reached
with two 1D-CNN layers with respectively 32 and 64 neurons and
a Re-Lu activation function, with each 1D-CNN followed by a Max-
Pooling layer of size 2, strides 2 and padding ’same’. After the
convolution blocks, a flatten block, a Dropout layer with 50% rate
of neuron disconnection and a final Dense layer with 4 neurons
followed by a Softmax activation function for final classification.
4.6
Model Training
For training, the best result (trail/error) was reached with the fol-
lowing hyperparameters:
• Learning Rate (LR)= 0.001
• Batch Size (BS) = 32
• Initial Epochs (EPOCHS) = 100
• Training early stop patience = 5, monitoring ’val_loss’
We also split the train data, separating 20% of it for validation
during training. After 60 epochs, the validation accuracy was 98%
as shown in Figure 5. Table 1 resumes the training results.
Figure 5: Accuracy vs epochs
4.7
Model Testing
Applying the test dataset we got around 94% of general accuracy.
Table 1 resumes the overall result. The general accuracy with the
test dataset was around 4% lower than we got during training, which
is expected, and the slight difference seems to confirm that the
model is generalizing well. Regarding the F1 score, the albopiticus
class gets a higher drop than the aegypti class. This result is given
by the the samples coming from 2 distinct smartphones in the case
of albopiticus and from 3 smarphones in the case of aegypti.
4https://docs.edgeimpulse.com/docs/eon-tuner
Train Result
Test Result
Evaluation / Metrics
Accuracy
F1-Score
Accuracy
F1-Score
General Test Result
98.2%
93.8%
aegypti
98.1%
0.99
97.2%
0.97
albopiticus
98.3%
0.98
86.9%
0.93
noise
98.3%
0.99
100%
0.95
other
98.2%
0.98
99.6%
0.94
Table 1: Model Train and Test performance
5
HARDWARE SOLUTION
For the prototyping we decided to focus on TinyML devices that
have an embedded microphone. Table 2 shows the main character-
istics of the three devices: the Arduino Nano 33 TinyML Kit, the
Arduino Portenta and the Wio Terminal. We opted for LoRaWAN
as communications protocol as it is low power and long distance
and it allows for the deployment of devices in remote areas [3].
The Arduino Nano 33 and the Wio Terminal require an external
Grove device to be able to send data via LoRaWAN. The Portenta
has a LoRa chip included in the Portanta Vision Shield. The micro-
phone technology is quite different in the three solutions. While the
Arduino Nano 33 has a single microphone, the Arduino Portenta
has two microphones of the same type. The Wio uses a Electret
Condenser Microphone. The Wio Terminal has a 2.4" LCD that can
be used to visualize text or images.
5.0.1
Model Optimization. For the three devices, the trained and
tested model was optimized, mainly quantizing all model param-
eters (from four bytes float32 to one byte int8). The optimization
was carried on in two steps, using:
• TensorFlow Lite (TF-Lite) - quantization
• Edge Impulse EON Compiler- to reduce memory use
Table 3 summarizes the estimated on-device performance after
optimizations. It is clear that the Portenta, with the faster CPU
clock has a shorter latency compared to the other devices.
5.0.2
Model Deployment. The optimized model (quantized and
optimized with the EON Compiler) was deployed as an Arduino
Library that runs on all three ARM-Based devices analysed in this
work. The generated .zip library has a size of 4.3Mb , including all
needed code to run inference on embedded devices. The Arduino
Library was generated using Edge Impulse Studio, based on the
Google Framework [4]
6
EVALUATION
We started our evaluation by measuring the power consumption of
the three devices while operating in inference mode and in data-
transmission mode. The Arduino code produced by Edge Impulse
was modified to allow the maximum flexibility: the user can decide
not to send any data and to come up with a visualization system
(LED/display/other), or to send data via a LoRaWAN network. In
the latter case, additional information can be sent together with
the inference result. For example the temperature and humidity
levels could be of interest to scientists working on modelling the
presence of mosquitoes in a specific area.

PAGE 5
Classifying mosquito wingbeat sound using TinyML
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
Name
MCU
Microphone
Memory
Clock speed
LoRa
Price
Arduino Nano 33
TinyML kit
Cortex-M0+
MP34DT05
1MB
64MHz
External Grove sensor
RFM95 module
USD 70
Arduino Portenta H7
Cortex M7 and
Cortex M4
2 x MP34DT05
16MB
M7 at 480 MHz
and
M4 at 240 MHz.
External with
Arduino Portenta Vision Shield
ABZ-093 LoRa Module
with ARM Cortex-M0
USD 153
Wio Terminal
Cortex-M4F
Electret Condenser
4MB
120MHz
External Grove sensor
RFM95 module
USD 60
Table 2: Technical characteristics of the three TinyML devices
Optimation Method
RAM
[KB]
ROM
Flash
[KB]
Latency
[ms]
Nano
Latency
[ms]
Portenta
Latency
[ms]
Wio
No Optimization
53.2
116.7
626
123
334
Quantized (int8)
17.1
69.3
133
27
71
Quantized + EON
15.2
51.6
133
27
71
Table 3: Estimated on-device performance after optimiza-
tions
6.1
Power consumption for inference
We used the OTII device to measure the power consumption of the
devices, as shown in Figure 6. OTII is a source measure unit (SMU)
with a constant voltage or constant current source, replacing the
battery of the embedded devices for a test run. The user can check
the statistics of the accumulated energy consumption continuously
while recording. Table 4 shows the power consumption of the de-
vices while in inference mode. In this mode the embedded device is
continuously listening for the wingbeat sound and will categorize
the mosquito type according to the model.
Figure 6: OTII device measuing power consumption of an
Arduino Nano 33
Arduino
Nano 33
Arduino
Portenta
Wio
Terminal
Power consumption
Inference mode
13.4mA
154mA
91.9mA
Table 4: Power consumption while in Inference mode
6.2
Power consumption with data transmission
To measure power consumption with LoRaWAN data transmission
we had to analyze the consumption in the two phases of transmis-
sion and of reception of LoRa frames, as shown in Figure 7 where
we graph the power consumption of the Arduino Nano 33 and of
the Wio Terminal. To make the measurements comparable we made
sure that the same spreading factor was used during transmission
(set to SF7), that the packet size was the same (2 bytes, necessary
to send the 4 categories of classification output) and that the trans-
mission sampling rate was set to 60 seconds. The overall power
consumption of the three devices if shown in Table 5. As it clearly
visible, the Portenta is the most power hungry device of the three,
while the Nano 33 is the most low power one.
Figure 7: Power consumption of an Arduino Nano 33 and
Wio Terminal during LoRa transmission

PAGE 6
tinyML Research Symposium’22, March 2022, San Jose, CA
Altayeb, Rovai and Zennaro.
Arduino
Nano 33
Arduino
Portenta
Wio
Terminal
Power consumption
LoRa transmission mode
1.86mWh
10.1mWh
8.9mWh
Table 5: Power consumption while LoRa transmission mode
Arduino
Nano 33
Arduino
Portenta
Wio
Terminal
Battery time
LoRa transmission mode
4 days
13h
20.1h
Table 6: Battery life time
6.3
Estimated battery life
Using the OTII’s battery estimation tool we simulated the battery
life of the three devices under test by using a 2000mAh LiPo battery
and by setting the transmission every 60 seconds. The results of
the simulation are summarized in Table 6. A battery life of 4 days
would allow the user to leave the device in the field, measuring
the presence of mosquitoes and sending the result of the inference
via LoRaWAN transmission. A small solar panel would make the
system completely sustainable from the energy point of view. The
features of sustainability and of communication flexibility has not
been provided by other solutions presented in the literature and
is, in our view, extremely useful to monitor potential vectors in
remote areas.
7
DISCUSSION
We have shown that TinyML is capable of categorizing mosquito
species by listening to the sound of wingbeats. When considering
different hardware solutions, some parameters have to be consid-
ered.
The first is cost. While the Nano 33 and the Wio have similar
costs when considering the LoRaWAN option, the Portenta is twice
as expensive. As in our application latency is not an important
parameter, it is not worth choosing this expensive solution.
Another important parameter is power consumption. We have
shown that power consumption for both inference and inference
plus transmission allow for battery-operated devices for long peri-
ods of time. This means that the solutions are field-ready for our
application.
The third parameter to be considered is flexibility. The Nano and
the Wio have Grove connectors, meaning that additional sensors
can be used. This is an important feature as local scientists might
want to use sensors for their research on mosquito proliferation.
One example could be measuring light, temperature and humidity
to try to model the presence of a specific type of mosquito in an
area. By using external Grove sensors together with the Grove LoRa
module, they can send the data wirelessly. The Grove connector
can also be used to add an external display or a buzzer, if the local
population has to be alerted about the presence of a dangerous
species.
8
CONCLUSIONS
We have developed a sustainable solution to categorize mosquitoes
in the field using TinyML. Several other solutions based on ML
and audio sensors have been presented but the uniqueness of the
proposed system is that is adds field-readiness to accurate ML-
based categorization. We have shown that commercially available
TinyML devices can be used for a week in the field to monitor the
proliferation of mosquitoes. As future work we plan to optimize
power consumption by developing our bare-bone embedded deice
to only measure audio signals and send results via LoRaWAN.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank the TinyML4D Academic Network working group
for its continuous support and vibrant exchange of ideas.
REFERENCES
[1] Sajjad Abdoli, Patrick Cardinal, and Alessandro Lameiras Koerich. 2019. End-to-
end environmental sound classification using a 1D convolutional neural network.
Expert Systems with Applications 136 (2019), 252–263.
[2] Timothy C. Winegard. 2019. The Mosquito: A Human History of Our Deadliest
Predator. Dutton.
[3] Bharat S Chaudhari, Marco Zennaro, and Suresh Borkar. 2020. LPWAN technolo-
gies: Emerging application characteristics, requirements, and design considera-
tions. Future Internet 12, 3 (2020), 46.
[4] Robert David, Jared Duke, Advait Jain, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Nat Jeffries, Jian Li,
Nick Kreeger, Ian Nappier, Meghna Natraj, Shlomi Regev, et al. 2020. Tensor-
flow lite micro: Embedded machine learning on tinyml systems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.08678 (2020).
[5] Ivan Kiskin, Adam D Cobb, Lawrence Wang, and Stephen Roberts. 2020. Humbug
zooniverse: A crowd-sourced acoustic mosquito dataset. In ICASSP 2020-2020
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 916–920.
[6] Haripriya Mukundarajan, Felix Jan Hein Hol, Erica Araceli Castillo, Cooper
Newby, and Manu Prakash. 2017. Using mobile phones as acoustic sensors for
high-throughput mosquito surveillance. Elife 6 (2017), e27854.
[7] World Health Organization et al. 2014. A global brief on vector-borne diseases.
Technical Report. World Health Organization.
[8] Marcelo Schreiber Fernandes, Weverton Cordeiro, and Mariana Recamonde-
Mendoza. 2020. Detecting Aedes Aegypti Mosquitoes through Audio Classifica-
tion with Convolutional Neural Networks. arXiv e-prints (2020), arXiv–2008.
[9] Kirankumar Trivedi and Harsh Shroff. 2021. Identification of deadliest mosquitoes
using wing beats sound classification on tiny embedded system using machine
learning and edge impulse platform. Kaleidoscope Academic Conference Proceed-
ings 2021 (2021), 117–122.
[10] Pete Warden. 2018. Speech Commands: A Dataset for Limited-Vocabulary Speech
Recognition. arXiv:1804.03209 [cs.CL]
